Proposal - Schema for Batch Messages (#166)
LibertyDSNP/frequency: designdocs/batched_messages.md

* [Glossary](#glossary)

## Context and Scope
This design document describes message schemas. It also will describe
batchability as a logical construct derived from schemas.

> We will also be describing APIs for sending and retrieving messages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will also be updating the APIs for creating schemas.
```

## Problem Statement
In order to reduce costs for announcers of messages on-chain as well as reduce
network congestion, announcers collate messages into batches of the same type of
message and announce the batch location on-chain, instead of announcing each
individual message.

However, this idea does not go far enough. Batching allows us to support posting
massive amounts of data, but it would still be expensive to post data of this
size on chain.

We can leverage off chain storage to make posting large message collections cheap, but we need to
find a way to constrain the message types posted offchain so that message
consumers know what types of data to expect. This document aims to explore what
a system that does the above could look like.

## Goals and Non-Goals
This specifies how messages are to be announced on chain; what is required and
how a batch may be partially verified based on on-chain information.

This document specifes how messages can be inferred from both schema format type
and payload location.

This document also specifies how schemas will constrain the shape of off chain
messages.

> This document does not describe the types of DSNP messages that will be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document does not describe the types of DSNP Announcements that will be
```

described by schemas. In theory, any message model can be supported.

This document also does not discuss validation of either model or model type. If
this type of validation is necessary, it should be described elsewhere.

## Proposal
* All names are placeholders and may be changed.
* Types may change as needed during implementation phase
* Errors in the extrinsic(s) must have different, reasonably-named error enums for each type of error for ease of debugging.

### Constants
TBD

### Enums
* `ModelType` - supported serialization formats for message payloads files. Currently only [Parquet](https://parquet.apache.org/docs/) and
  [Avro](https://avro.apache.org/docs/current/) are supported.
* `PayloadLocation` - The location of the payload. Can be either `OnChain` or `IPFS`.

### Traits
* `Model` - TBD. A set of functions for accessing message payload information.
  * Derives `Encode`, `Decode`, `MaxEncodedLen`

>   * `max_length`: `SchemaMaxBytesBoundedVecLimit`

Reviewer: I'm not sure what this trait is for.

Reviewer: Ah I see as `max_length` might be different for different Model Types right?

Author: yes, that and payload

### Types

> * `SchemaAnnouncement<T:Config, M: Model>`: generic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `Schema<T:Config, M: Model>`: generic
```

    * `model_type`: `ModelType` See enum section above.
    * `model`: `M` Defines the shape of the message payload.
    * `payload_location`: `PayloadLocation` See enum section above.

> * `MessageAnnouncement<T:Config>`: generic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `Message<T:Config>`: generic
```

    * `schema_id`: `u16`
    * `source`: `MsaId` Source of the message.
    * `provider`: `MsaId` Public key of a capacity-providing account
    * `onchain_payload`: `Vec<u8>?`

>     * `offchain_payload`: `Vec<u8>?`

Reviewer: Agreed that this is still a bit TBD.

In the end we have this data:

- OnChain
  - `source`: `MsaId` Source of the message.
  - `payload`: `Vec<u8>` (I think)
- IPFS
  - `payload_cid`: `?` CIDv2 of the IPFS file
  - `payload_byte_length`: `u32 ?` The size of the IPFS file in bytes

How we store that data in the message I think is an outstanding question. I think there are several options, but not sure what way we should go.

### Extrinsics
#### register_schema(origin, schema_params)
Creates and posts a new schema on chain. The transaction fee is determined in part by the model size.

* **Parameters**
  * origin:  required for all extrinsics, the caller/sender.

>   * `schema_params`: `SchemaAnnouncement`, the parameters to use in the batch announcement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * `schema_params`: `Schema`, the parameters to use in the batch announcement.
```

> * **Event**:  `Event::<T>::SchemaAnnounced(schema_id, model, model_type, payload_location)`

Reviewer: I don't think we have any new events other than what is already in the Message design doc.

SchemaCreated is already a thing, and when the messages design doc covers the events when a new message is created.

* **Restrictions**:
  * TBD

### Custom RPCs

#### get_schema(schema_id)

> Retrieves a `SchemaAnnouncement`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Retrieves a `Schema`.
```

* **Parameters**
  * `schema_id`: `u16` a schema identifier

* **Returns**
  * `None()` if no schemas meet the criteria.

>   * `Some(SchemaAnnouncement)`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * `Some(Schema)`
```

### Batch as a Logical Construct

We can circumvent defining a batch explicitly if we leverage the model type and
payload location included in the schema.

Parquet files are lists by default, so consumers can assume that a message is
a batch if it has a Parquet model type. In this case, the "batch" will likely be
located off chain, because storing such a file on-chain would incur significant
cost.

Avro files, on the other hand, have the option of being `record`  types (see
[Avro docs](https://avro.apache.org/docs/current/spec.html#schemas)). These files
could be stored either on chain or off chain. If they are on chain, it would
make sense for the file to be small (lower cost). However, they could be large
and stored off chain.

See below to see how the combination of format and location indicate possible
payload types:

```txt

> | Model Type | Location         | Payload                               |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Model Type | Location         | Example Use Case                        |
```

* [Glossary](#glossary)

## Context and Scope
This design document describes message schemas. It also will describe
batchability as a logical construct derived from schemas.

> We will also be updating the APIs for creating schemas`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will also be updating the APIs for creating schemas.
```

## Problem Statement
In order to reduce costs for announcers of messages on-chain as well as reduce
network congestion, announcers collate messages into batches of the same type of
message and announce the batch location on-chain, instead of announcing each
individual message.

However, this idea does not go far enough. Batching allows us to support posting
massive amounts of data, but it would still be expensive to post data of this
size on chain.

We can leverage off chain storage to make posting large message collections cheap, but we need to

> find a way to constrain the message types posted offchain so that message

Reviewer: ```suggestion
find a way to constrain the message types posted off chain so that message
```

a system that does the above could look like.

## Goals and Non-Goals
This specifies how messages are to be announced on chain; what is required and
how a batch may be partially verified based on on-chain information.

This document specifes how messages can be inferred from both schema format type
and payload location.

This document also specifies how schemas will constrain the shape of off chain
messages.

This document does not describe the types of DSNP Announcements that will be
described by schemas. In theory, any message model can be supported.

This document also does not discuss validation of either model or model type. If
this type of validation is necessary, it should be described elsewhere.

## Proposal
* All names are placeholders and may be changed.
* Types may change as needed during implementation phase
* Errors in the extrinsic(s) must have different, reasonably-named error enums for each type of error for ease of debugging.

### Enums
* `ModelType` - supported serialization formats for message payloads files. Currently only [Parquet](https://parquet.apache.org/docs/) and
  [Avro](https://avro.apache.org/docs/current/) are supported.

> * `PayloadLocation` - The location of the payload. Can be either `OnChain` or `OffChain`.

Reviewer: Swapping to match below. (Other off chain locations may be supported in the future)
```suggestion
* `PayloadLocation` - The location of the payload. Can be either `OnChain` or `IPFS`.
```

  * `OnChain`

>   * `OffChain`

Reviewer: Swapping to match below.
```suggestion
  * `IPFS`
```

* `Payload`
  * `OnChain`
    * `source`: `MsaId`
    * `payload`: `Vec<u8>`

>   * `IPFS`

Reviewer 2: any reason why we don't need `source` for IPFS?

Reviewer: On-chain data can have this source specified and validated on-chain, but off-chain data, it is not as simple.

That said I wonder if we should shift "on-chain delegation" (aka source enabled/disabled) to a boolean flag (via enum for readability perhaps) on the schema. @dopatraman thoughts?

For those schemas not using batching like DSNP, they might have all that data coming from a delegated source.

It feels complex, but perhaps we actually reduce the complexity overall. First, around payload because then source is "always" there (just sometimes required to be empty by the schema flag for it) and then the payload is simpler. Second, we don't have an AND. The payload location doesn't ALSO define if source is a thing, which isn't really a part of payload location.

Reviewer: On additional conversation, If we shift that to a separate flag we can make that a separate story or design doc.

>     * `payload_cid`: `TBD`

Reviewer: 1. Should likely be clear in that it is a v1 cid
2. We can use `Vec<u8>` here I think. That's what https://docs.rs/cid/0.8.5/cid/struct.CidGeneric.html#method.to_bytes returns.
```suggestion
    * `payload_cidv1`: `Vec<u8>`
```

>     * `payload_byte_length`: `TBD`

Reviewer: I think we can set this to `u64` safely

### Traits
* `Model` - TBD. A common interface for accessing message payload information.
  * Derives `Encode`, `Decode`, `MaxEncodedLen`
  * `max_length`: `SchemaMaxBytesBoundedVecLimit`

### Types
* `Schema<T:Config>`: generic
    * `model_type`: `ModelType` See enum section above.
    * `model`: `Model` Defines the shape of the message payload.
    * `payload_location`: `PayloadLocation` See enum section above.

* `Message<T:Config>`: generic
    * `schema_id`: `u16`
    * `source`: `MsaId` Source of the message.
    * `provider`: `MsaId` Public key of a capacity-providing account
    * `payload`: `Payload` The payload.

> (See alternatives section for another way to structure payloads)

Reviewer: I don't actually understand this way of structuring it. The alt section I do, but I don't understand why 
    source, payload, payload_cid, and payload_byte_length are under enum.

> ### Extrinsics

Reviewer: We need to add the updated signature for `messages.add` here as well.

#### register_schema(origin, schema_params)
Creates and posts a new schema on chain. The transaction fee is determined in part by the model size.

* **Parameters**
  * origin:  required for all extrinsics, the caller/sender.
  * `schema_params`: `Schema`, the parameters to use in the batch announcement.

* **Restrictions**:
  * TBD

> ### Custom RPCs

Reviewer: I think we need to understand how `message.get_messages_by_schema` rpc will change.

Author: if I understand correctly, it may not need to change? It looks like the only `Message` related struct is `MessageResponse`, which will keep the same structure it has now. Please let me know if there's something I'm missing.

Reviewer: Hmm... I think that is correct for now. We can improve that later.

### Alternatives and Rationale
We discussed whether a batch message itself can be delegated, but this would
have complicated things and we cannot come up with a use case for delegating
batches. It also violates the idea of users delegating explicitly to every
provider that performs a service for them, which is a fundamental value we want
to apply to the network.

We discussed whether to allow URLs such as HTTP/HTTPS or other URLs and instead opted for content-addressable URIs (CIDv1) which can be resolved by some other service.  This allows us to put the file hash directly into a URI.  It reduces message storage because we don't have to include both a URL and a file hash. A file hash is necessary as a check against file tampering.

We revisited the idea of whether it really is necessary to include a file size. We will be charging a premium for larger files, however, there will be per-byte discount for larger files in order to create an incentive for posting batches while reducing the incentive for announcers to allow spam. Although the processing and downloading time for enormous files also serves as a disincentive for spam, we feel it would not be sufficient.

> Despite the fact that announcers can lie abut the file size, the file_size

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Despite the fact that announcers can lie about the file size, the file_size
```

parameter also serves as an on-chain declaration that not only allows consumers
of batches to quickly discover if a batch announcer was honest, but the file
requestor can know in advance when to stop requesting data.

#### Message Payloads
The document above describes payload location as an enumeration of on-chain and
off-chain types. This allows us to encapsulate different information for both
on-chain and IPFS payloads without overloading a single type with both sets of
fields.

However, if we discover that both on-chain and off-chain payloads are too
complex to fit into a single enum, we could use traits to our advantage:

```rust

> trait OnChainPayload {

Reviewer: I don't know that we ever need to read this data on-chain, just write (or delete). The `get_messages_by_schema` rpc call does need to be able to build the correct response type however. Hmm... Mostly just thinking out loud

  // FYI: the following is just for demonstrative purposes
  fn source() -> MsaId
  fn payload() -> Vec<u8>
}

trait IPFSPayload {
  // FYI: the following is just for demonstrative purposes
  fn payload_cid() -> CIDv2
  fn payload_length() -> u32
}

enum Payload {

>   OnChain(Box<dyn OnChainPayload>),

Reviewer 2: nit: I don't think using `dyn` is recommended. I think we can rewrite this in a way to remove `Box` and `dyn`

This document specifes how messages can be inferred from both schema format type
and payload location.

This document also specifies how schemas will constrain the shape of off chain
messages.

This document does not describe the types of DSNP Announcements that will be
described by schemas. In theory, any message model can be supported.

This document also does not discuss validation of either model or model type. If
this type of validation is necessary, it should be described elsewhere.

## Proposal
* All names are placeholders and may be changed.
* Types may change as needed during implementation phase
* Errors in the extrinsic(s) must have different, reasonably-named error enums for each type of error for ease of debugging.

### Enums
* `ModelType` - supported serialization formats for message payloads files. Currently only [Parquet](https://parquet.apache.org/docs/) and
  [Avro](https://avro.apache.org/docs/current/) are supported.
* `PayloadLocation` - The location of the payload. Can be either `OnChain` or `IPFS`.
  * `OnChain`
  * `IPFS`
* `Payload`
  * `OnChain`
    * `source`: `MsaId`
    * `payload`: `Vec<u8>`
  * `IPFS`

>     * `payload_cidv1`: `Vec<u8>`

Reviewer: I pushed for cidv1. That way a single schema can only support one location. If you want to support a schema you know exactly how to get the data and you don't end up in a resolver mess and half supported uris

(See alternatives section for another way to structure payloads)

### Extrinsics
#### register_schema(origin, schema_params)
Creates and posts a new schema on chain. The transaction fee is determined in part by the model size.

* **Parameters**
  * origin:  required for all extrinsics, the caller/sender.
  * `schema_params`: `Schema`, the parameters to use in the batch announcement.

* **Restrictions**:
  * TBD

### Custom RPCs

#### get_schema(schema_id)
Retrieves a `Schema`.

* **Parameters**
  * `schema_id`: `u16` a schema identifier

* **Returns**
  * `None()` if no schemas meet the criteria.
  * `Some(Schema)`

#### MessagesPallet::add(origin, on_behalf_of, schema_id, payload, payload_location)
This existing RPC call will need to change slightly. The `payload` param, at the
of this document's writing, is a `Vec<u8>`. This proposal will turn the
`payload` param's type to `Payload`. It will also add a 5th param for
`payload_location`.

* **Parameters**
  * `origin`: `Origin` A signed transaction origin from the provider
  * `on_behalf_of`: `Option<MessageSourceId>` The msa id of delegate.
  * `schema_id`: `u16` A schema identifier
  * `payload`: `Payload` The message payload

>   * `payload_location`: `PayloadLocation` The payload location

Reviewer: I'm not sure why we need payload_location. That information should be derivable from `schema_id` right?

Author: good point

to apply to the network.

We discussed whether to allow URLs such as HTTP/HTTPS or other URLs and instead opted for content-addressable URIs (CIDv1) which can be resolved by some other service.  This allows us to put the file hash directly into a URI.  It reduces message storage because we don't have to include both a URL and a file hash. A file hash is necessary as a check against file tampering.

We revisited the idea of whether it really is necessary to include a file size. We will be charging a premium for larger files, however, there will be per-byte discount for larger files in order to create an incentive for posting batches while reducing the incentive for announcers to allow spam. Although the processing and downloading time for enormous files also serves as a disincentive for spam, we feel it would not be sufficient.

Despite the fact that announcers can lie about the file size, the file_size
parameter also serves as an on-chain declaration that not only allows consumers
of batches to quickly discover if a batch announcer was honest, but the file
requestor can know in advance when to stop requesting data.

#### Message Payloads

> The document above describes payload location as an enumeration of on-chain and

Reviewer 3: I wonder if since these implementation details are so up in the air whether it's worth outlining them at all. Maybe we could just say that the batch/schema updates will affect the current message retrieval format and that the specifics are TBD by implementer(s).  It's a good suggestion but maybe belongs in a story for that instead (i.e. don't just delete the ideas)

    * `next_index`: `u32` starting index of next results in `next_block`
    * `results`: `Vec<BatchAnnouncement>`

### Message Schema

Distributing data on a decentralized network has a few fundamental problems that
are worth discussing here. Primarily, those problems are:
- What shape is this data in?
- How do I authenticate this data?

> - How do these actors access this information?

Reviewer 4: I found this confusing until reading further down.

Maybe:
`How can actors access this information?` or
`How can users access this information?`

Less primary but very much salient are a couple of secondary concerns:
- How do I make sure this data occupies no more space / time than necessary?
- How do I make sure this data can be easily indexed and searched?

In the days of yore, it was easy to answer these questions. A centralized
service would declare an output shape and make it available to the world via an
API they would maintain and authorize. In our world, it is not so simple. Each
actor on a DSNP-implementing system must be able to imbue their announcements

> with trust without exerting control over the entire network. Announcements can

Reviewer 4: Will `Announcent` need to be modified to match the nomenclature defined in the Frequency Chain diagram or is this related to DSNP spec?

point to data stored anywhere, and this data must be accessible by any other
actor on the network. Without these considerations, a decentralized network
would not serve its users needs.

Let's try addressing the above concerns one-by-one.

#### Message Shape

The batch file message schema could look like the following:

```json

> // Batch Message

Reviewer 4: Same with this, should `Batch Message` match whatever nomenclature is decide in @wilwade 's  diagram? 

There are other terms below that will likely not be decided upon until next week, so rather than comment each one I'll just leave this one as a reminder that we should probably have whatever terminology is decided upon as canon, to be matched in code and documentation.
